Is the following statement true or false?
“Truth is relative.”
That statement
is not relatively but absolutely false.
Some think
that something is truth for one person
but not truth for another person.
Many religious organizations
claim to have the truth.
However, between them
there are many contradicting teachings.
Is this just another evidence
that all truth is relative
—that there is no absolute truth?
No.
The truth is that truth is not relative;
it is absolute.
Those who say truth is relative
are not only relatively but absolutely wrong.
The Hebrew word for “truth,” ʼemethʹ,
is often rendered “truth”
and may designate what is firm,
trustworthy, stable, or faithful.
The Greek word for “truth,”
a·leʹthei·a,
originates with a word meaning
“not concealed,”
so the truth often involves the revealing
of that which was formerly hidden.
Jesus said according to Luke 12:2:
“But there is nothing carefully concealed
that will not be revealed,
and nothing secret
that will not become known.”
There are over 70 places
in the Gospel accounts
where Jesus is said
to have used a unique expression
to emphasize the truthfulness of his words.
He would often say “Amen”
to introduce a sentence.
The corresponding Hebrew word
meant “certain, true.”
Notes The New International Dictionary
of New Testament Theology:
“By introducing his words with amen
“Jesus labelled them as certain and reliable.
“He stood by them and made them binding
on himself and his hearers.”
The New International Dictionary
of New Testament Theology,
Volume 3, page 901, says:
“[Many people try] to ‘unmask’ everything,
“in the belief that no one and nothing
“can genuinely lay claim to truth. . . .
“Truth can indeed be found . . .
“[We need to display]
a humble submission to truth
“whenever and wherever it emerges.
“Such openness to truth is required
“of those who worship the God of truth . . .
“Reverence for truth ensures honesty
“in a man’s dealings with his neighbour,
“both in word and deed.
“This is the attitude . . .
to which both the O[ld] T[estament]
and the N[ew] T[estament] bear witness.”
Does the truth ever change?
That question was raised by V. R. Ruggiero
in his book The Art of Thinking.
His answer is no.
To quote him:
“It may sometimes seem to [that it changes],
but on closer inspection
it will be found not to.”
Yes, the truth never changes!
“Consider,” he says,
“the case of the authorship
“of the first book of the Bible,
the book of Genesis.
“For centuries Christians and Jews alike
“believed that the book had a single author.
“In time this view was challenged,
“and eventually replaced by the belief
“that as many as five authors
contributed to Genesis.
“Then, in 1981,
“the results of a 5-year linguistic analysis
of Genesis
“were published,
stating that there is
“an 82 percent probability
of single authorship,
“as originally thought.
“Has the truth
about the authorship of Genesis changed?
“No.
Only our belief has changed.”
He also wrote:
“The truth will not be changed
by our knowledge or by our ignorance.”
And we agree.
In fact, no one really believes
that there is no truth.
When it comes to physical realities,
such as medicine, mathematics,
or the laws of physics,
all people believe that some things are true.
Who of us would dare to ride in an airplane
if we didn’t believe
that the laws of aerodynamics
were absolute truths?
Verifiable truths do exist.
They surround us,
and we stake our lives on them.
Does the truth ever change?
It does not.
Our understanding of truth changes
as we progress in understanding it,
but the truth never changes.
When Jesus said that our purpose in life
was to talk about the truth,
he was speaking of something
that faithful Jews had valued
for centuries.
In their sacred writings,
the Jews had long read of truth
as something concrete, not theoretical.
In the Bible,
“truth” translates the Hebrew word ʼemethʹ,
which signifies that which is firm, solid
and, perhaps most of all, reliable.
The Jews had good reason
for viewing truth in that way.
They called their God,
“Jehovah, the God of truth.”
This was because everything Jehovah said
he would do, he did.
When he made promises, he kept them.
When he inspired prophecies,
they were fulfilled.
When he uttered final judgments,
they were carried out.
Millions of Israelites
had been eyewitnesses of these realities.
The inspired writers of the Bible
recorded them
as indisputable facts of history.
Unlike other books viewed as sacred,
the Bible is not set
against a backdrop of myth or legend.
It is firmly grounded in verifiable facts
—historical, archaeological, scientific,
and sociological realities.
No wonder the psalmist says to Jehovah:
“Your law is truth. . . .
“All your commandments are truth. . . .
The very essence of your word is truth”!
Since Jehovah God is the Author of the Bible,
the Bible is truth.
Jesus Christ echoed the words of that psalm
when he said in prayer to Jehovah:
“Your word is truth.”
Jesus knew that everything his Father spoke
was absolutely firm and reliable.
Likewise,
Jesus himself was “full of . . . truth.”
Yes,
Jesus was even the personification of truth.
The Mosaic Law was truth.
But it was not the full truth.
Jesus taught something different
from the Mosaic Law.
The Bible shows that the Mosaic Law
was a “shadow,” or prophetic picture,
of greater realities,
which came true through Christ.
So the Mosaic Law was not the full truth
but a pattern of it.
Jesus was not the shadow but the reality.
He said at John 14:6:
“I am . . . the truth.”
But as far as teachings are concerned,
what is truth?
What helps us to understand it?
The Bible speaks
of “the spirit of the truth.”
What is “the spirit of the truth”?
It is the spirit
that proceeds from Jehovah God.
It is pure and holy.
Jesus told his disciples at John 16:12, 13:
“I still have many things to say to you,
“but you are not able to bear them now.
“However, when that one comes,
“the spirit of the truth,
“he will guide you into all the truth,
“for he will not speak of his own initiative,
“but what he hears he will speak,
“and he will declare to you
the things to come.”
God’s spirit would teach them
everything they needed to know
to carry out their work,
recalling and opening up their understanding
to things
they had previously heard from Jesus
but had not understood.
God’s spirit would also declare to them
the things coming,
including the bringing to light
the significance
of Jesus’ death and resurrection,
as these events were then yet future
and were among the things
that his disciples did not understand
in the beginning.
Brother Charles Taze Russell wrote the book
The Divine Plan of the Ages.
It was published in 1886.
It included a discussion on
“The Bible as a Divine Revelation
Viewed in the Light of Reason.”
It said:
“The depth and power and wisdom
and scope of the Bible’s testimony
convince us that not man,
but Almighty God, is the author.”
To appreciate the truth more,
to what can we compare the truth?
Truth is like a mirror
that helps us to see the facts
and, if necessary, to improve our looks.
Truth is like a pillar
—firm and supportive—
and it helps to combat false teachings.
Truth is also compared
to a girdle, or “belt,”
that warriors used.
It helps us to continue with right conduct.
Truth is like a rainbow for beauty.
Truth is as beautiful
as the song of the nightingale.
Truth is like a romantic bonfire for warmth
on a cold evening.
Here is an illustration
that many of you will like:
Truth is like the first cup of coffee
in the morning,
invigorating somebody.
Yes, truth is invigorating.
Truth is like a magnet,
drawing honest-hearted ones to God.
Truth is like an oasis in the desert.
Truth is like an anchor in the stormy seas.
Truth is like a lifeboat on a sinking ship.
Truth is like a lighthouse in the night,
guiding a boat safely to the shore or harbor.
Truth is like a compass
showing sailors the way.
But it is also like a compass
showing the way out of a jungle
to a safe area.
Truth is like the rising sun
bathing the landscape in warm light.
Truth is like the display of fireworks
for beauty.
Truth is like the magnetic shield
around the earth,
protecting it from deathly cosmic radiation.
Truth is like light.
“The fruitage of the light
consists of every sort of . . . truth.”
He that “does what is true
comes to the light,”
the Bible says.
Imagine you were born blind
and received eyesight through an operation.
Wouldn’t you be elated?
Truth is like that when somebody
comes to know and appreciate it.
Truth is like beautiful music
played solo or by an orchestra.
Truth is like the most delicious food
for taste and gives strength.
Truth is what a nursing mother is
to her baby.
Truth is like a hidden treasure;
we need to dig for it.
Truth is like refreshing water on a hot day.
Truth is like a mighty river.
If you try to stop it with a dam,
it will overflow the dam.
Nobody can stop the truth.
Why?
Because Jehovah, the Almighty,
is backing it up.
Truth is like a flower
or even a bouquet
of beautiful little flowers.
Brother Russell once wrote:
“Truth, like a modest little flower
“in the wilderness of life,
“is surrounded and almost  choked
“by the luxuriant growth
of the weeds of error.
“If you would find it
you must be ever on the lookout.
“If you would see its beauty
you must brush aside the weeds of error
“and the brambles of bigotry.
“If you would possess it
you must stoop to get it.
“Be not content with one  flower of truth.
“Had one been sufficient
there would have been no more.
Gather ever, seek for more.”
Truth is like a fragrance, or perfume.
Truth is like a sparkling diamond.
Do you love diamonds?
But the truth’s value
is so much more than diamonds
because it brings Jehovah’s friendship
and leads to everlasting life.
Truth is compared to a way on which we walk.
Second Peter 2:2
speaks of “the way of the truth.”
‘God is a Spirit,
and those who worship him
must do so with spirit and truth.’
Now is the time to study the truth
and attend Christian meetings
where the truth is taught.
Do not miss congregation meetings.
First Timothy 3:15 compares the congregation
with “a pillar . . . of the truth.”
The congregation
preserves the purity of the truth
and upholds it.
True, Jehovah teaches us through the Bible
but also through Christian meetings.
We are also to speak the truth by preaching.
We speak the truth also with one another.
We have the truth on our lips;
we have the truth around our hips.
Ephesians 6:14 says
that we have “the belt of truth
fastened around [our] waist.”
The world is in utter confusion.
What a blessing it is to know the truth!
We rejoice in it!
We are ready to preach the truth
and teach the truth.
Yes, we talk the truth,
and we walk in the truth.
At 3 John 3, we read:
“Go on walking in the truth.”
Those who walk in the truth now
will walk forever.
Micah 4:5 says:
“For all the peoples will walk,
each in the name of its god,
“we will walk
in the name of Jehovah our God
forever and ever.”
And that is a long time!
Help your students to love the truth
and to live the truth
but, if necessary, to be willing
to die for the truth and for Jehovah.
The truth is invincible
and will conquer this wicked world.
May we all,
including our relatives
and our Bible students,
have the determination to walk in the truth
and talk about the truth.
Why shall we do this?
Because we love the truth
and we love the God of truth.
We are also to live the truth
by our Christian conduct.
Brothers, this is the truth!
His Word is truth.
Keep talking the truth,
and keep walking in the truth.
Then you will walk forever
and praise our loving God of truth!